.\" Manual page for f00(1)
.\" Source of truth: man/f00.1 (tracked). clap --generate-man is a developer dump only.
.TH F00 1 "July 2026" "f00 0.12.0" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
f00 \- list directory contents (ls program written in Rust)
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B f00
[\fIOPTION\fR]... [\fIFILE\fR]...
.P
.B f00
\-\-json | \-\-json\-full | \-\-tree | \-\-csv | \-\-tsv
[\fIOPTION\fR]... [\fIFILE\fR]...
.P
.B f00
\-\-update | \-\-check\-update | update | check\-update
.P
.B f00\-tui
.br
.B f00
\-\-browse
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B f00
lists directory contents.
The program is written in
.BR Rust .
.P
Use
.B f00 \-\-gnu
as a drop-in for GNU coreutils
.BR ls (1).
If stdout is not a TTY, f00 enables the same script-safe mode by default.
Use
.B \-\-no\-gnu
to force modern output on a pipe.
.P
On a TTY, f00 can show icons, git status, colors, tree view, and JSON.
f00 keeps the GNU
.B ls
option set.
On measured short and long workloads, f00 is faster than
.BR eza (1)
and
.BR lsd (1).
See
.I https://f00.sh
for benchmark method and numbers.
.P
The primary command name is
.BR f00 .
The installer does not replace system
.I /bin/ls
by default.
Optional aliases or
.B F00_INSTALL_LS=1
can put
.B ls \(-> f00
on PATH only.
.SH OUTPUT MODES
.TP
\fBDefault / columns\fR
Multi-column listing on a TTY (same style as
.BR ls ).
.TP
\fB\-1\fR
One name per line.
.TP
\fB\-l\fR
Long listing (permissions, links, owner, group, size, time, name).
.TP
\fB\-C\fR / \fB\-x\fR / \fB\-m\fR
Column, across, or comma-separated formats.
.TP
\fB\-\-tree\fR
Directory tree.
.TP
\fB\-j\fR, \fB\-\-json\fR
Compact JSON array.
With color off, output is plain text for
.BR jq (1).
.TP
\fB\-\-json\-full\fR
Full metadata JSON (implies JSON mode).
Fields include type detail, device ids, unix times, xattrs when available,
and executable/hidden flags.
.TP
\fB\-\-csv\fR / \fB\-\-tsv\fR
CSV or TSV table output.
.SH FLAG TAXONOMY
Options fall into three groups.
.SS 1. GNU coreutils surface
.B f00
accepts the GNU
.B ls
options, including (not a full list):
.P
.B \-a \-A \-l \-1 \-C \-m \-x \-h \-\-si \-R \-r \-t \-S \-X \-v \-U \-f
.br
.B \-u \-c \-\-sort \-\-time \-\-time\-style \-\-full\-time
.br
.B \-d \-F \-p \-\-file\-type \-\-indicator\-style \-\-classify
.br
.B \-B \-I \-\-hide \-L \-H \-\-dereference\-command\-line\-symlink\-to\-dir
.br
.B \-g \-o \-G \-n \-i \-s \-k \-\-block\-size \-\-author
.br
.B \-b \-Q \-N \-q \-\-quoting\-style \-\-show\-control\-chars \-\-hide\-control\-chars
.br
.B \-w \-T \-Z \-\-zero \-D \-\-dired \-\-hyperlink \-\-color \-\-format
.br
.B \-\-group\-directories\-first
.P
With
.B \-\-gnu
(or auto non-TTY mode), icons and git columns are off.
Output is for scripts.
CI tests byte-level parity against system
.B ls
for many option combinations.
.SS 2. Modern listing (TTY)
.TP
\fB\-\-icons\fR[=\fIWHEN\fR]
Nerd Font icons (auto/always/never). Default: auto on TTY. Off under
.BR \-\-gnu .
.TP
\fB\-\-git\fR / \fB\-\-git=false\fR
Show git status in long listings when the
.B git
feature is built in (default on).
.TP
\fB\-\-color\fR[=\fIWHEN\fR]
auto | always | never (GNU WHEN synonyms are accepted).
.TP
\fB\-\-no\-gnu\fR
Force modern output when stdout is not a TTY.
.SS 3. f00\-only options
.TP
\fB\-j\fR, \fB\-\-json\fR, \fB\-\-json\-full\fR
JSON output (see
.BR "JSON OUTPUT" ).
.TP
\fB\-\-tree\fR, \fB\-\-csv\fR, \fB\-\-tsv\fR
Tree, CSV, or TSV output.
.TP
\fB\-\-gnu\fR
Force GNU / script-safe mode.
.TP
\fB\-\-max\-depth\fR=\fIN\fR
Limit recursion and tree depth.
.TP
\fB\-\-ignore\-files\fR / \fB\-\-no\-ignore\fR
Use or ignore ignore-files (when supported).
.TP
\fB\-\-archive\fR
List inside archive files when the archive feature is enabled.
.TP
\fB\-\-threads\fR=\fIN\fR
Metadata threads (0 = auto).
.TP
\fB\-\-io\-uring\fR
Linux batch metadata (when built with io-uring).
.TP
\fB\-\-profile\fR
Print timing data to stderr.
.TP
\fB\-\-config\fR=\fIPATH\fR
Load a configuration file.
.TP
\fB\-\-browse\fR / \fB\-\-tui\fR
Start the dual-pane browser.
Prefer the
.B f00\-tui
binary when present.
.TP
\fB\-\-update\fR / \fB\-\-check\-update\fR
Update from GitHub Releases (checksum verified).
.TP
\fB\-\-list\-plugins\fR
List plugins when plugins are built in.
.SH OPTIONS
Many options match GNU
.BR ls (1).
This section lists common and f00-specific options.
Run
.B f00 \-\-help
for the full option list.
.SS Filtering and sorting
.TP
\fB\-a\fR, \fB\-\-all\fR
Do not ignore entries starting with
.BR . .
.TP
\fB\-A\fR, \fB\-\-almost\-all\fR
Do not list implied
.B .
and
.BR .. .
.TP
\fB\-d\fR, \fB\-\-directory\fR
List directories themselves, not their contents.
.TP
\fB\-R\fR, \fB\-\-recursive\fR
List subdirectories recursively.
.TP
\fB\-r\fR, \fB\-\-reverse\fR
Reverse sort order.
.TP
\fB\-t\fR
Sort by time, newest first.
.TP
\fB\-S\fR
Sort by size, largest first.
.TP
\fB\-X\fR
Sort by extension.
.TP
\fB\-v\fR
Natural (version) sort.
.TP
\fB\-U\fR
Do not sort (directory order).
.TP
\fB\-f\fR
Like
.B \-aU
(unsorted, show all).
.TP
\fB\-\-sort\fR=\fIWORD\fR
name | size | time | extension | version | none | width
.TP
\fB\-\-time\fR=\fIWORD\fR
mtime | atime | ctime | birth (and GNU synonyms).
.TP
\fB\-u\fR / \fB\-c\fR
Use access time / status-change time for sort/display (GNU semantics).
.TP
\fB\-B\fR, \fB\-\-ignore\-backups\fR
Ignore entries ending with
.BR ~ .
.TP
\fB\-I\fR, \fB\-\-ignore\fR=\fIPATTERN\fR
Ignore names matching shell pattern (repeatable).
.TP
\fB\-\-hide\fR=\fIPATTERN\fR
Hide pattern unless
.B \-a
/
.B \-A
.
.SS Long format and sizes
.TP
\fB\-l\fR
Long listing.
.TP
\fB\-g\fR / \fB\-o\fR
Long without owner / without group (GNU).
.TP
\fB\-G\fR, \fB\-\-no\-group\fR
Do not list group.
.TP
\fB\-n\fR, \fB\-\-numeric\-uid\-gid\fR
Numeric uid/gid.
.TP
\fB\-i\fR, \fB\-\-inode\fR
Print inode number.
.TP
\fB\-s\fR, \fB\-\-size\fR
Print allocated size in blocks.
.TP
\fB\-h\fR, \fB\-\-human\-readable\fR
Human sizes (powers of 1024) with
.B \-l
/
.BR \-s .
.TP
\fB\-\-si\fR
Human sizes with powers of 1000.
.TP
\fB\-k\fR, \fB\-\-kibibytes\fR
1024-byte blocks for
.BR \-s .
.TP
\fB\-\-block\-size\fR=\fISIZE\fR
Scale sizes by SIZE (GNU SIZE syntax).
.TP
\fB\-\-time\-style\fR=\fISTYLE\fR
full-iso | long-iso | iso | locale | +FORMAT
.TP
\fB\-\-full\-time\fR
Like
.B \-\-time\-style=full\-iso
.
.TP
\fB\-\-author\fR
Print author (often same as owner on Linux).
.TP
\fB\-Z\fR, \fB\-\-context\fR
Print SELinux security context when available.
.SS Display and quoting
.TP
\fB\-F\fR, \fB\-\-classify\fR[=\fIWHEN\fR]
Append file type indicators.
.TP
\fB\-p\fR
Append
.B /
to directories.
.TP
\fB\-\-file\-type\fR
Like
.B \-F
without
.BR * .
.TP
\fB\-\-indicator\-style\fR=\fIWORD\fR
none | slash | file-type | classify
.TP
\fB\-\-group\-directories\-first\fR
List directories before files.
.TP
\fB\-b\fR, \fB\-\-escape\fR
C-style escapes for nongraphic characters.
.TP
\fB\-Q\fR, \fB\-\-quote\-name\fR
Enclose names in double quotes.
.TP
\fB\-N\fR, \fB\-\-literal\fR
Print raw names.
.TP
\fB\-\-quoting\-style\fR=\fIWORD\fR
literal | shell | shell-always | shell-escape | c | escape | ...
.TP
\fB\-w\fR, \fB\-\-width\fR=\fICOLS\fR
Assume screen width COLS.
.TP
\fB\-T\fR, \fB\-\-tabsize\fR=\fICOLS\fR
Assume tab stops every COLS columns.
.TP
\fB\-\-zero\fR
End lines with NUL, not newline.
.TP
\fB\-D\fR, \fB\-\-dired\fR
Emacs dired mode.
.TP
\fB\-\-hyperlink\fR[=\fIWHEN\fR]
OSC 8 hyperlinks for names.
.SS Dereference
.TP
\fB\-L\fR, \fB\-\-dereference\fR
Follow symlinks when showing file information.
.TP
\fB\-H\fR, \fB\-\-dereference\-command\-line\fR
Follow symlinks on the command line.
.TP
\fB\-\-dereference\-command\-line\-symlink\-to\-dir\fR
Follow command-line symlinks that point to directories.
.SS Compatibility and mode
.TP
\fB\-\-gnu\fR
GNU / script-safe mode (no icons/git chrome).
.TP
\fB\-\-no\-gnu\fR
Force modern mode on non-TTY stdout.
.TP
\fB\-\-color\fR[=\fIWHEN\fR]
Colorize output (default: auto).
.TP
\fB\-\-icons\fR[=\fIWHEN\fR]
File icons (default: auto).
.TP
\fB\-\-git\fR
Enable/disable git column (boolean flag; default on when available).
.SS Machine formats (f00)
.TP
\fB\-j\fR, \fB\-\-json\fR
Compact JSON.
.TP
\fB\-\-json\-full\fR
Full metadata JSON.
.TP
\fB\-\-tree\fR
Tree view.
.TP
\fB\-\-csv\fR / \fB\-\-tsv\fR
CSV / TSV.
.SS Self-update and misc
.TP
\fB\-\-update\fR
Download and install the latest release binary (checksum verified).
.TP
\fB\-\-check\-update\fR
Report whether a newer release is available (non-mutating).
.TP
\fB\-\-version\fR, \fB\-V\fR
Print version.
.TP
\fB\-\-help\fR
Print help (
.B \-h
is human-readable, as in GNU
.BR ls ).
.SH COLORS AND THEMES
.B f00
uses the terminal theme.
It does not invent a private RGB palette for listing colors.
.SS File names:
.B LS_COLORS
File names and type indicators use the
.B LS_COLORS
environment variable (same rules as GNU
.BR ls
and
.BR dircolors (1)).
If
.B LS_COLORS
is unset, standard dircolors defaults apply.
The terminal maps ANSI colors to the active theme (for example Dracula or Monokai).

.SS Long-format metadata (permissions, dates, sizes, owners, git)
f00 paints metadata with the
.B terminal ANSI palette
(so themes such as Dracula or Monokai apply) and optional maps:
.TP
\fBF00_COLORS\fR / \fBEZA_COLORS\fR / \fBEXA_COLORS\fR
eza-compatible
.BI key = ansi
lists (colon-separated). Precedence:
.B F00_COLORS
, then
.BR EZA_COLORS ,
then
.BR EXA_COLORS .
Useful keys:
.BR da
(date),
.BR sn
(size),
.BR uu
/
.BR gu
(user/group),
.BR ur
/
.BR uw
/
.BR ux
(and group/other triples) for permission bits,
.BR gm
/
.BR ga
/
.BR gd
/
.BR gv
/
.BR gt
(git),
.BR mp
(meta/inode/nlink).
Never uses hardcoded truecolor RGB for listing chrome.
.SS JSON pretty mode
When color is on, pretty JSON uses ANSI palette colors (cyan keys, green strings,
yellow numbers).
Use
.B \-\-color=never
or a pipe for compact JSON without ANSI.
.SH JSON OUTPUT
.SS Compact (\fB\-j\fR / \fB\-\-json\fR)
Output is one JSON array.
Each object includes core fields:
name, path, kind, size, mode / mode_octal, permissions, readonly,
timestamps when known, inode, nlink, blocks, uid, gid, owner, group,
symlink_target, extension, git_status, depth.
.P
With color off (default for pipes): single-line compact JSON for
.BR jq (1).
With color on: pretty-printed JSON.
.SS Full (\fB\-\-json\-full\fR)
Includes compact fields plus full metadata, for example:
type_detail, full mode bits, device major/minor, rdev, blksize,
unix epoch timestamps, is_file / is_dir / is_symlink / is_executable / is_hidden,
absolute_path, author, SELinux context when available, and xattr names
(Linux).
Use
.B \-\-json\-full
when you need the full record.
Use
.B \-j
for smaller, faster output.
.SH TREE OUTPUT
.B f00 \-\-tree
[\fIPATH\fR]
shows a directory tree.
You can combine tree with filters, depth limits, color, and icons.
Example:
.P
.nf
.RS
f00 \-\-tree crates
f00 \-\-tree \-\-max\-depth=2 .
.RE
.fi
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
\fBLS_COLORS\fR
File name / type colors (dircolors format).
.TP
\fBNO_COLOR\fR
When set, disable color (common CLI convention).
.TP
\fBF00_GNU\fR / \fBF00_NO_GNU\fR
Force GNU mode / force modern mode (overrides auto non-TTY detection when set).
.TP
\fBQUOTING_STYLE\fR
Default quoting style (GNU).
.TP
\fBTIME_STYLE\fR
Default
.B \-\-time\-style
(GNU).
.TP
\fBCOLUMNS\fR
Assumed terminal width when not a TTY / not overridden by
.BR \-w .
.TP
\fBGITHUB_TOKEN\fR / \fBGH_TOKEN\fR
Optional token for update checks against the GitHub API when rate-limited.
.TP
\fBEZA_COLORS\fR / \fBEXA_COLORS\fR / \fBF00_COLORS\fR
Reserved for eza-compatible metadata color maps when supported by the build.
.SH FILES
.TP
\fI~/.config/f00/config.toml\fR
Optional user configuration (see project docs).
.TP
\fI~/.local/bin/f00\fR
Default install location for the binary.
.TP
\fI~/.local/share/man/man1/f00.1\fR
Default man page location when installed by
.BR install.sh .
.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
\fB0\fR
Success.
.TP
\fB1\fR
Minor problems (for example, cannot access a subdirectory while listing others).
.TP
\fB2\fR
Serious trouble (for example, invalid usage or cannot access a command-line argument).
.P
Aligned with GNU
.B ls
exit conventions where applicable.
.SH INSTALLATION
Recommended install command:
.P
.nf
.RS
curl \-fsSL https://f00.sh/install.sh | bash
.RE
.fi
.P
The installer installs
.B f00
to
.B ~/.local/bin
by default.
It installs
.B f00\-tui
when the archive includes it.
It installs this man page to
.B ~/.local/share/man/man1/f00.1
when the archive includes the man page.
.P
Installer environment variables:
.TP
\fBINSTALL_DIR\fR
Binary install directory (default:
.BR ~/.local/bin ).
.TP
\fBMAN_DIR\fR
Man page directory (default:
.BR ~/.local/share/man/man1 ,
or
.B $XDG_DATA_HOME/man/man1
when
.B XDG_DATA_HOME
is set).
.TP
\fBF00_INSTALL_MAN\fR
Set to
.B 0
to skip man page installation.
.TP
\fBF00_VERSION\fR
Pin a release tag (for example
.BR v0.12.0 ).
.TP
\fBF00_INSTALL_LS\fR
Set to
.B 1
to also symlink
.B ls \(-> f00
in the install directory.
This does not overwrite a non-symlink.
.TP
\fBF00_INSTALL_TUI\fR
Set to
.B 0
to skip
.BR f00\-tui .
.P
If
.B man
does not find the page, set
.BR MANPATH ,
for example:
.P
.nf
.RS
export MANPATH="$HOME/.local/share/man${MANPATH:+:$MANPATH}"
man f00
.RE
.fi
.P
Many systems already search
.BR ~/.local/share/man .
.SH UPDATING
.P
.nf
.RS
f00 \-\-check\-update
f00 \-\-update
.RE
.fi
.P
You can also re-run the installer.
For package-manager installs, use that manager upgrade command
(for example
.BR "brew upgrade f00"
or
.BR "nix profile upgrade" ).
.SH EXAMPLES
.TP
List the current directory (TTY defaults):
.B f00 \-la
.TP
Long listing in GNU style:
.B f00 \-\-gnu \-lah
.TP
Alias for GNU-style
.BR ls :
.B alias ls='f00 \-\-gnu'
.TP
Show a tree:
.B f00 \-\-tree crates
.TP
Compact JSON for
.BR jq :
.B f00 \-j \-\-color=never | jq '.[].name'
.TP
Full metadata JSON:
.B f00 \-\-json\-full README.md
.TP
Pipe (script-safe by default):
.B f00 \-la /tmp | head
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR ls (1),
.BR dircolors (1),
.BR jq (1),
.BR eza (1),
.BR lsd (1)
.P
Website:
.I https://f00.sh
.br
Source:
.I https://github.com/theesfeld/f00
.SH BUGS
Report defects at
.IR https://github.com/theesfeld/f00/issues .
.SH AUTHORS
f00 contributors.
See the project repository.
.SH COPYRIGHT
License: MIT OR Apache-2.0.
.\" end of man page
