.TH F00-LS 1 "2026" "f00 0.15.5" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
f00-ls \- list directory contents
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B f00-ls
[\fIOPTION\fR]... [\fIFILE\fR]...
.SH DESCRIPTION
List information about each
.IR FILE
(the current directory by default).
.B f00-ls
is part of the
.B f00
suite (f00tils): one freestanding x86-64 assembly multicall binary that replaces GNU coreutils.
.PP
Default mode is
.B modern
(color and icons on a TTY; optional git and tree views).
Use
.B --core
for strict GNU coreutils
.B ls
presentation.
.SH COREUTILS FLAGS
.TP
\fB\-a\fR, \fB\-\-all\fR
Do not ignore entries that start with
.BR . .
.TP
\fB\-l\fR
Use a long listing format.
.TP
\fB\-h\fR, \fB\-\-human\-readable\fR
With
.B \-l
and
.BR \-s ,
print sizes like 1K 234M 2G.
.TP
\fB\-\-color\fR[=\fIWHEN\fR]
Colorize the output.
.I WHEN
is
.BR auto ,
.BR always ,
or
.BR never .
.PP
Run
.B f00-ls --help
for the full coreutils-compatible flag list.
.SH MODERN FLAGS
.TP
\fB\-\-core\fR
Use strict coreutils-compatible output (no icons, git, or modern defaults).
.TP
\fB\-\-no\-core\fR
Force modern mode even when standard output is not a TTY.
.TP
\fB\-j\fR, \fB\-\-json\fR
Write a detailed JSON listing.
.TP
\fB\-\-csv\fR
Write a detailed CSV listing.
.TP
\fB\-\-tree\fR
Show a tree view.
.TP
\fB\-\-git\fR
Annotate entries with git status.
.TP
\fB\-\-icons\fR[=\fIWHEN\fR]
Show Nerd Font icons.
.TP
\fB\-\-browse\fR
Open the interactive dual-pane browser.
.SH AUTHOR
f00 contributors. License MIT.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR ls (1),
.BR f00 (1)
.PP
https://f00.sh
