.TH F00 1 "2026" "f00 0.15.9" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
f00 \- f00tils — freestanding assembly multicall coreutils suite
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B f00
[\fIOPTION\fR]... [\fIFILE\fR]...
.br
.B f00-\fIutil\fR
[\fIOPTION\fR]... [\fIARG\fR]...
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B f00
is one static freestanding x86-64 binary that implements the GNU coreutils surface.
There is no libc.
.PP
The tool is selected by
.BR argv0
(multicall). Install or link the binary as
.BR f00-ls ,
.BR f00-cat ,
.BR ls ,
.BR cat ,
and other names.
.PP
Default mode is
.BR modern .
Use
.B --core
for script-safe coreutils presentation.
Many tools accept
.B --json
and
.BR --csv .
.SH INVOCATION
.TP
\fBf00\fR / \fBf00-ls\fR / \fBls\fR
List directory contents. See
.BR f00-ls (1).
.TP
\fBf00-\fIutil\fR
Run the named suite tool (for example
.BR f00-wc
or
.BR f00-sha256sum ).
.SH COMMON OPTIONS
.TP
\fB\-\-help\fR
Show help for the selected tool.
.TP
\fB\-\-version\fR
Show the suite version.
.TP
\fB\-\-core\fR
Use strict coreutils-compatible presentation.
.TP
\fB\-\-json\fR / \fB\-\-csv\fR
Write machine-readable summaries when supported.
.SH BUILD
.nf
cd asm && make && make smoke
.fi
.SH FILES
.TP
.I file_id.diz
Release scene card (ACiD / 16colo.rs-style block ASCII). Lives at the repository root.
Each SemVer GitHub Release attaches the same file as an asset next to the tarball and packages.
.SH AUTHOR
f00 contributors. License MIT.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR f00-ls (1),
.BR f00-cat (1),
.BR ls (1)
.PP
https://f00.sh
.br
Repository
.I file_id.diz
— release scene card.
